i want to talk to y'all today a little
bit about something that i call
reintegration anxiety which is kind of
weird okay
so this is what i noticed something
weird happened chat
so back at the start of the the pandemic
there were you know everyone was like oh
i'm stuck at home
like the journal of the american medical
association did a study that showed that
depressive symptoms are 300 percent
worse than they used to be
anxiety was getting worse people didn't
know if they were going to be able to
pay their bills they didn't know what
was going to happen to the economy
they didn't know if they were going to
be able to pay their rent and so
everyone was like oh my god the mental
impacts of kovitt are so bad man they
suck so hard
and now that things are starting to open
up it's kind of like
weird because everyone was like i can't
wait for covey to end i can't wait for
kovid to end but now that covet is maybe
starting to end i know that delta
variant is bad but people are getting
vaccinated people are starting to open
and
open things up people are sort of like
okay so are you thrilled that you're
gonna be back in school and like hanging
out with people socially
something weird has happened especially
with a lot of the students that i work
with
where they're kind of like actually i
feel really anxious about reintegrating
into society
like what i hear from students that i
work with is i'm not sure i'm gonna be
able to like
do school anymore like i don't know if i
can do school
and now that i can socialize with people
it's like oh my god i can't wait to
socialize with people and it's like now
when you think about socializing with
people
you want to do it but you feel like
really really anxious about it
and it's really weird but the best term
that i can kind of come up with
is something that i'd call reintegration
anxiety and so it's it's kind of weird
but there seems to be a new kind of
anxiety where everyone's been waiting to
get back into society
but at the same time like now that we're
able to do it it seems actually really
hard to reintegrate into society
so i'd like to do today is talk to you
guys a little bit about this
and sort of try to explain a little bit
about how i understand it
okay so to begin with you know when
covet hit everyone was sort of like
kind of positive about it like people
felt isolated people
felt depressed people felt anxious about
the future
um they had difficulty maintaining
social connections and they actually
turned to online communities to start to
socialize with people
and the cool thing is that if you if you
kind of look at you know data or not not
data because there aren't really a whole
lot of studies about this but if you
look at people from our community what
we found is that
people who have robust online
connections
were actually a little bit resilient to
the negative
impacts of covet and what we did as a
society is we turn to like more online
interactions
and that's sort of a double-edged sword
because research does show that spending
a lot of time on social media
um actually is has negative impacts on
your mental health
and at the same time we were kind of
stuck because we couldn't spend time
with people
in the real world so like it was nice to
have like discord and twitch and things
like that
gaming and so it's sort of like a little
bit of a double-edged sword where like
gamers were somewhat resilient but we're
engaging in more social anxiety i mean
social media so sometimes that can make
mental health stuff worse
so it's kind of a wash the interesting
thing is that
if you talk to people who engage a lot
in in
online communities and like engage with
people social uh
socially online as opposed to the real
world what you find is when when they go
back
out into the real world you can form a
real connection online but when you go
back out into the real world
it seems to be hard for people and so
what i found is that especially now like
working with a lot of students that
you know they've been hanging out on
discord for the last year they've been
doing
online school and like zoom classes and
all this kind of stuff
and they've like hated it in some ways
but at the same time
it's been sort of like comforting in
some ways
oh no so when kobit started everyone was
like
there was there were huge impacts to our
negative health people felt isolated
they felt depressed they felt anxious
you know um
studies showed that like depression and
anxiety was like three times worse
than prior to covid the isolation was
really really messing with people
the gaming community was somewhat
resilient to these effects especially at
the beginning because we already had
good online support systems
and the rest of the world shockingly
switched over to like this online world
where
this is how we socialize it was zoom
birthday parties
and and you know like hanging out with
people
over like discord and whatsapp and and
stuff like that
and so this was okay for a while right
so people like
especially in the gaming community we
did okay for a while but then as the
pandemic wore on people were like i
can't wait to get back in school i can't
wait to like see my friends again
this sucks i'm trapped in my house and
so then something weird happened like
now that things are opening up and we're
like hey you can go socialize again and
like you're gonna be back in school like
the people that i work with are like
wait a minute i actually feel really
really uncomfortable with that stuff
and now they would they come to my
office and they say things like
you know i'm not sure i can actually do
school anymore
i'm not sure like like i got invited to
a party but like i don't know if i
even want to go and people are really
confused by this because
they're like you know at the beginning
of the pandemic it's like okay we're
gonna be trapped for a couple weeks like
i'ma learn how to break
bake bread i'm gonna learn how a new
language i'm gonna like learn all this
stuff i'm gonna take this as an
opportunity
and then the isolation sets in the
depression sets in i'ma work on a
project
and now that the world is opening up
again everyone's like oh god thank god
like that oh i can start doing things
again and now when you try to do things
like
it seems actually really really hard to
go out and like get back into school and
i have students that come to me and are
saying i'm not sure i can do school
anymore like i hate
zoom school but i don't know if i can
actually cut it in real school
i people are like i'm so isolated i'm so
lonely i'm so depressed do you want to
go to this party no i feel super anxious
going to the party
so what's going on here why is this
happening
and what can we do about it so this is
something that for lack of a better term
i call
reintegration anxiety which is sort of
like this
tendency to not be able to like go back
into the world
and what i actually have found is that i
think that it correlates with some
interesting principles of neuroscience
why is there a
there's a blanket in my door
okay so going back to where things are
so here's how
here's my understanding of like how
reintegration anxiety works okay so when
we start socializing with people online
what tends to happen is that our brain
has certain like social
circuits which sometimes don't get used
and so
start to rust a little bit so if we
think about how our brain works what we
discover
is that you know if you don't use a part
of your brain it kind of like starts to
rust so if i speak two languages and
then i don't speak one of those
languages for a few years
what happens is that part of my brain is
sort of like oh we don't need this
anymore so let's get rid of it
and what i found in people who interact
a lot online
is that there are so there are social
circuits that start to go like
dormant or rust so there are parts of
our brain that will look at
body language facial expression tone
other things like even like physical
touch and use those
as means to kind of socially reassure us
so when i when i interact with people a
lot there are circuits of my
in my brain that are very active that
are telling me hey these people like you
like
they're sort of interpreting all of this
information
about people's body language and the way
that they interact with me and their
facial expressions and things like that
and it uses that information to reassure
me
and what happens when we interact with
people a lot online
is those circuits of our brain kind of
like don't get used right because if i'm
talking to people on a discord call like
sure it may be a video chat
but especially if i'm playing games and
stuff like i'm not going to be
interpreting their body language and
their facial expressions
and if we think about the way that our
mind looks at a social situation
and tells us whether to be anxious or
not anxious
what it'll do is include a lot of like
information about stuff like facial
expressions and body language
so when these circuits in our mind go
dormant what happens is we're left with
a big question mark
and if you think about what anxiety is
the bigger the question mark is the
bigger your anxiety is going to be
because anxiety is all about uncertainty
right so if i think about i'm anxious
about going to the party
and i ask people like you know if i ask
someone why are you anxious about the
party they'll say things like i don't
know who's going to be there i don't
know if i'm going to say something
stupid i don't know if people are going
to like me
so a lot of anxieties have to do with i
don't knows you don't know what's going
to happen it's uncertain
and so as we sort of turn to online
interaction and some of these other
circuits of our brain go dormant
what we're left with is more and more
question marks and the more
we're left with question marks the more
likely we are
to feel anxious so now what's happened
is we have these
reassuring parts of our brain which
normally will help us feel comfortable
in social situations
that have basically been dormant for a
year to a year and a half
and so i think this is part of the
reason that we're experiencing what i
call reintegration anxiety
we also sort of see this when it comes
to online schooling so like
you know in school it requires like
particular faculties
like i have to wake up at a particular
time i have to like you know show up i
have to shower i have to do these
kinds of things which online school
sort of insulates me from and i don't
have to do those things
so as those parts of our brain get rusty
we start to understandably
start to feel somewhat concerned about
being able to kind of re-integrate
into regular school and so
what we kind of end up with is um
this situation where like we're we're
basically like out of practice
integrating into the real world again
and since we're out of practice this
sort of results in anxiety
and so people sort of ask me okay what
should i do about this
right and so this is the kind of tricky
part but like there's no way to
artificially turn on those circuits
again and there's no way that i've been
able to discover to sort of make it
painless
in terms of reintegrating into society
but what i have found is that people
tend to do
far better than they think they're gonna
do and what i mean by that is that like
you know if i'm working with let's say
like
a college undergraduate who's like oh
i'm not sure
about like starting up a study group
because i don't know if the people are
gonna like me and stuff
and they're sort of envisioning all of
these negative things and what my
experience has been is that if you can
actually
get yourself to go there right if you
can show up there you may have a lot of
anxieties that are very hard to
alleviate
ahead of time but the cool thing is it's
almost like magic but once you
show up there and your brain starts to
like
dust off these old circuits like facial
expression and body language
what happens is the anxiety kind of
starts to melt away
it's almost like you know if i if i've
gotten rusty in terms of speaking a
language if i
show up in the country it's going to be
a little bit uncomfortable because i
don't really remember how to speak the
language
but my brain will sort of start working
for me and will start to activate and it
actually gets really really easy
for me to relearn language and so i it
may i may think that it'll take me three
months to learn the language but it
actually turns out that after about a
week like my anxiety is way better i've
learned a lot
a lot i may not be 100 back to 100 after
a week but it actually gets
it gets far easier and is far better
than i expected it to be
so this is basically what i found in
terms of reintegration anxiety
um you know just to kind of summarize
when we started covid people were really
isolated and depressed and
really wanted to get back and socialize
and like go back to school and live a
normal life
and now something really weird is
happening which is that like as we're on
the cusp of hopefully starting to
live a normal life again delta variant
aside
what we actually find is that people
have a lot of difficulty reintegrating
into society
they're concerned about being able to
cut it in school they're concerned about
like
you know socializing and feeling dumb
and feeling out of practice
and things like that and the good news
is that it's actually seems to be
somewhat solvable
the other thing that i want to let
people know is that this appears to be a
relatively normal and shared experience
for most of society
so it seems like you know most of the
university students that i work with are
experiencing something about
something like this and the good news is
that you know
you may be kind of anxious
in terms of like socially integrating
with people
and it it turns out that they're anxious
too so one of the tips that i'll give
the you know like my university students
is actually to tell people be like hey
i've been cooped up for a year
and i'm actually looking forward to like
making new friends
like if you meet like a group of people
right you can say hey i'm looking
forward to making new friends
i'm curious like how other people feel
about that
and what i actually find is it's like
incredibly relieving to everyone in the
group when one person says that because
we're all in the same boat and all it
takes is like one person
to like you know crack the damn a little
bit and then everyone's super relieved
they're like yeah man like absolutely
let's hang out
and all you have to do is kind of take
that first step and then like
it's actually really easy to kind of get
everyone on the same page and people
seem to be excited
they're anxious they don't know if you
want to be friends with them right like
no one knows everyone's like oh my god i
want friends but i don't know if this
person wants to be friends with me
am i too weird have i been like enclosed
in my room too long is it like awkward
do people not like me anymore
this is what reintegration anxiety is
and as you kind of bring awareness to it
it turns out that actually like it gets
better like way faster than
you may have thought so the first thing
is you know as covet is ending if you if
you guys have been like
isolated and like wanting to get back
into society
it's completely normal to feel a little
bit confused about that
and like be surprised by oh i really
want to make friends but i feel like
really anxious and i feel like people
may think i'm stupid or i've gotten
rusty
there's probably a neuroscience reason
for that it's probably because you have
circuits in your brain that
normally are able to reassure you and
sort of can't right now because they've
gotten kind of like they've turned off
they'll turn back on but it may be a
little bit
painful for you to tolerate that anxiety
and it does seem to get better
school is sort of also seems to be kind
of that way
but jury's a little bit out there
because now we're into the summer so
most people aren't in active school
but for the people who have reintegrated
and like sort of started school back in
march or april some places started
in person classes then i noticed that
people also had reintegration anxiety
and it kind of got better
yeah so someone's asking what if you had
social anxiety before
and it's worse now during covid i think
i've seen the same thing
so the reason it's worse as far as i can
tell is because like we've gotten rusty
socially
so what i've seen in in my patients with
social anxiety
is that they've gone back to their
pre-covered state and actually like i'd
say
maybe a third of them have actually
gotten better like
post covet it's kind of weird i don't
understand that myself but like a third
people seem to be
better than their baseline what about
overall confidence i don't feel like
i've lost social skills as much as
confidence so this is a great
question because that's exactly how it
manifests
so you don't if you think about what is
the nature
of confidence in your mind what circuits
in your brain
lead you to confidence and so what what
i found is actually that like
a lot of our confidence comes from sort
of
mirroring from the outside world right
so when i walk into a room and
everyone's like
yay dr k is here
that's gonna help me feel a little bit
more confident so those are the kinds of
signals that we haven't gotten right we
haven't gotten reinforcement
in our ability to feel confident about
ourselves and so in the absence of that
reinforcement
this reintegration anxiety manifests as
a lack of subjectively feeling confident
the good news is that for people who
seem to lack that confidence
as they integrate just they kind of have
to understand that you're going to feel
pretty anxious but just show up
and it seems to get better relatively
quickly
so this is when someone says so it will
just get better i know it sounds
shocking
but that has largely been our experience
so when it'll just get better
if you expose yourself to social
situations
right if you go into situations and you
start talking to people
you start hanging out with people if you
see facial expressions in body language
then chances are this will start to go
away or will be at like a pre-covered
bass line
so someone's asking aspiring lawn lawn
clippings is asking
i quit my study how will it not spiral
in a gap year
so if you have a gap year and you quit
studying there's a decent chance it will
spiral
unless you have like a good amount of
structure or something to kind of
replace it with
so you got to be careful about taking
gap years because sometimes people do
spiral right like when it comes to a gap
year
some people like really flounder in the
lack of structure and some people can
really like
some people take a break and really
enjoy it and they sort of view it as a
vacation
other people will use it as like uh you
know an opportunity to like learn skills
or projects and just like
grow in a space outside of school
other people will actually spiral and
gap years so it's absolutely something
you need to be
careful about um
someone's asking how fast do you unrust
honestly i say it gets like 50
better in a week that's what i've seen
and like in two weeks you're like 80
there and then maybe in a month you're
like back to normal
so oxymoron indeed asks what if it
doesn't go away even after trying to
reintegrate
that is the anxiety you guys see that
what if
what if it doesn't get better oh my god
but like what if it does then it's a
non-issue so this is the nature of
anxiety so people are like what if it
doesn't get better
that is a product of the anxiety
you guys see that like it's a completely
normal thought
but i can answer that question then i'll
say well then there's a decent chance
that you
this will happen and then your anxiety
will say but what if that doesn't work
and what if that doesn't work and what
if that doesn't work your anxiety will
any reassurance that i give you your
anxiety will find
something else to be anxious about right
because reassurance doesn't actually
help that much with anxiety
so as long as the root of the anxiety is
there you're gonna
find some way to be concerned about a
what-if in the future
and this is the really tricky thing
about anxiety because anxiety says
what if that doesn't work and then as
long as that thought is there
do you actually take that first step so
this person is asking what if it
what if my anxiety doesn't go away after
reintegrating
and so as long as that that thought is
there will you try to reintegrate
and this is why anxiety controls your
life this is why anxiety can be so
crippling
because it's so worried it wants a
complete solution
before you take the first step and so
this is why you're stuck because there's
like there's no way
i can give you a hundred percent
guarantee that everything will work out
and if you're waiting for that one
hundred percent guarantee for the last
thing
to happen before you take the first step
then your
life will be controlled by anxiety